Add process for handling reports (#271)
openjs-foundation/cross-project-council: proposals/stage-1/CODE_OF_CONDUCT/HANDLING-REPORTS.md

5. Facts and opinions are gathered: Time is allocated to collect information in one place to make sure everyone involved has access.
6. Facts are discussed: The facts are discussed in context of opinions. Also see **What to look forward to** for guidelines on appropriate response.
7. An action to be taken is arrived at: The action to be taken is decided by consensus (see section on Consensus process) involving the roles listed in the next section.
8. Resolution offered: The resolution is offered to the reportee by the contact person. The reportee needs to accept the resolution for the matter to be resolved. If they don’t accept, go back to step 5. If there isn't a clear way to resolve the report, the report can be reviewed by the moderation team representatives from OpenJS projects to ensure that the the action and resolution are appropriate.
The report is resolved: The report is resolved if:
* the reportee accepts the action.
* there is no communication for 21 days on behalf of the original reporter.
* the Ombudsperson decides that the resolution as it stands is the best possible outcome within the constraints of all involved.

> ## Roles

Author: This is an excellent opportunity to clarify language.

I had used the word "reportee" to refer to the person/s against whom a violation was committed.

I used the word "reporter" when the person who made the report is not the same as the person against whom the violation was committed.

When we clarify, I can go in and change to make the language consistent, it may not be.

We also need a word to refer to the person/s who committed the violation.

* Moderation team representatives: Each project in the CPC which has a moderation team should have representation here. https://github.com/openjs-foundation can ask these folks if any are willing to also moderate this org.
* Ombudsperson: This person acts as an impartial intermediary between a reporter and the Foundation. They also serve to mediate between the moderation team representatives.
* Contact person: This is a sensitive matter. Each reportee should only have to become comfortable talking with 1 person who represents them to the representatives.
## Concensus process
_To be added after deliberation in CPC._
## Further questions
* How do we protect privacy?
* How do we investigate?
* What are the conflicts of interest?
* How to avoid conflicts of interest?
* Does this relate to the work of the Node.js and other projects’ moderation team?
## What to look forward to
* Beacon project

> * Code of Conduct Project: A cross-project collaboration between multiple open source tech communities RxJS, AngularJS, Node.js, Vue.js etc to find consensus on Code of Conducts. Progress is rapid and can add definition to our own process (where possible) within 6 months. Recommend incorporating the findings and avoid duplication of effort.

Author: I'd have loved to put links. They are existing initiatives. But they're not public. The work is intended to produce public resources and we can include them when they're available.

> * Code of Conduct Project: A cross-project collaboration between multiple open source tech communities RxJS, AngularJS, Node.js, Vue.js etc to find consensus on Code of Conducts. Progress is rapid and can add definition to our own process (where possible) within 6 months. Recommend incorporating the findings and avoid duplication of effort.

Reviewer: This is interesting, will they ever be public? or is there a way to have these links to check or understand?

> * Code of Conduct Project: A cross-project collaboration between multiple open source tech communities RxJS, AngularJS, Node.js, Vue.js etc to find consensus on Code of Conducts. Progress is rapid and can add definition to our own process (where possible) within 6 months. Recommend incorporating the findings and avoid duplication of effort.

Author: I'm moving this section to README.md and will link when the projects are public and links are available.

# Handling reports and escalation
This document describes the proposed process for handling reports and escalation, along with relevant roles in the OpenJS Foundation.

Reporting to the OpenJS Foundation either concerns a matter with the Foundation or is considered an escalation where insufficient resolution was provided by a project, with regards to violations of the Code of Conduct.

## Channels
* Email: report@openjsf.org.
* Form: It would be easier on the reportee to have a form template to help them structure their report. The form submission could trigger an email.

> * Repo: openjs/moderation (not provisioned). As commented in PR review, hosting sensitive personal information on GitHub needs due consideration, review, and possibly legal consultation.

Author: This document was written initially for project maintainers.

Removing content to README.md. Thanks for calling out.

>   * A form submission could open an issue in the repo, to allow folks to discuss in context.

Author: Moving "What to look forward to" section to README. Haven't used Beacon yet, don't know how much of this process the tool can help us take on.

## Confidentiality and record-keeping

> Everything reported and discussed is confidential unless explicitly stated. For any facts to be made public, the reportee’s explicit permission is needed. All reports should be recorded, together with the discussion of it. A private moderation repo would satisfy the need for recordkeeping.

Author: Rewording to address above:

```suggestion
Personal information is confidential. All reports should be recorded, together with the discussion of it. A private moderation repo would satisfy the need for recordkeeping.
```

## Steps/Escalation
1. A report is filed: This is the first step, mostly defined in Channels above.
2. The right people are alerted: See Roles.
3. Contact person assigned: See Roles.
4. Report is acknowledged: The contact person responds to let the reportee know that the report is being discussed.
5. Facts and opinions are gathered: Time is allocated to collect information in one place to make sure everyone involved has access.
6. Facts are discussed: The facts are discussed in context of opinions. Also see **What to look forward to** for guidelines on appropriate response.

> 7. An action to be taken is arrived at: The action to be taken is decided by consensus (see section on Consensus process) involving the roles listed in the next section.

Reviewer: > section on Consensus process

Can we link to the section?

8. Resolution offered: The resolution is offered to the reportee by the contact person. The reportee needs to accept the resolution for the matter to be resolved. If they don’t accept, go back to step 5. If there isn't a clear way to resolve the report, the report can be reviewed by the moderation team representatives from OpenJS projects to ensure that the the action and resolution are appropriate.

> The report is resolved: The report is resolved if:

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion

The report is resolved if:
```

* the reportee accepts the action.
* there is no communication for 21 days on behalf of the original reporter.
* the Ombudsperson decides that the resolution as it stands is the best possible outcome within the constraints of all involved.
## Roles
* CPC: The Cross Project Council must get involved in cases where a report has been escalated by a project or its team reponsible for enforcing their Code of Conduct. (TBD: role of regular and voting members)

> * Moderation team representatives: Each project in the CPC which has a moderation team should have representation here. https://github.com/openjs-foundation can ask these folks if any are willing to also moderate this org.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Moderation team representatives: Each project in the CPC which has a moderation team should have representation here. [OpenJS Foundation](https://github.com/openjs-foundation) can ask these folks if any are willing to also moderate this org.
```

> * Ombudsperson: This person acts as an impartial intermediary between a reporter and the Foundation. They also serve to mediate between the moderation team representatives.

Reviewer: Will there be any particular rule to decide on who will be this person? Like they cannot be from the same project, just to avoid any conflict of interest.

Author: That's a good issue to raise. We should clarify. For example, my own opinion is that this person should currently not be directly involved with a specific project (OpenJS Foundation is fine), but past history is ok.

# Handling reports and escalation
This document describes the proposed process for handling reports and escalation, along with relevant roles in the OpenJS Foundation.

This process covers two types of reports based on ./FOUNDATION_CODE_OF_CONDUCT_REQUIREMENTS.md:

* Reports for spaces managed by the Cross Project Council (CPC) which come in through `report@opensjsf.org`
* Escalations which come in through `coc-escalation@openjsf.org`.   

Generally, reports to coc-escalation should refer to a report that was already submitted to:

* report@openjsf.org or

> * one of the projects reporting emails 

Reviewer 2: projects is meant to be possessive as in `projects'` here, correct?

Reviewer 3: Fixed

* explanation of why the reportee does not feel comfortable using the previous reporting emails for the initial report

If a report to coc-esclation does not include one of those, the reportee will be asked to to provide one of those three as the 
reason for reporting to coc-escalation.

## Confidentiality and record-keeping
Personal information is confidential. All reports should be recorded, together with the discussion of it. The following private repos will be used to record and discuss reports.

* report@openjsf.org -> github.com/openjs-foundation/moderation
* coc-escalation@openjsf.org -> github.com/openjs-foundation/coc-escalation

For each report there should be an issue which captures the report, discussion and final conclusion.  The report should NOT contain identifying details of the reporter.

## Conflict of Interest

> Any member of the CPC or CoCP who is involved in the report should recuse themselves from the discussions.

Reviewer 2: This is the first place CoCP is used in this document so it should probably be written out at Code of Conduct Panel (CoCP)

Reviewer 3: fixed

## Reports to report@openjsf.org

All members of the CPC are subscribed to the `report@openjsf.org` mailing list.  When a report is received the following actions will be taken:
   * One of the CPC members will respond to the reportee confirming that the report has been received. When possible the same person
     who responds initially will act as the point of contact for future conversations.

>    * If no respose has been send by the next CPC meeeting the CPC chair will ensure there is a private session in which the one of the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   * If no response has been sent by the next CPC meeting, the CPC chair will ensure there is a private session in which the one of the
```

>    * If no response has been sent by the next CPC meeting, the CPC chair will ensure there is a private session in which the one of the

Reviewer 2: Remove `the` from `in which the one of`

Reviewer 3: Fixed

     CPC members is identified as the point of contact.
   * The point of contact will then ensure the following steps are completed:
     1. Report is acknowledged: The contact person responds to let the reportee know that the report is being discussed.
     2. Information gathering: Time is allocated to collect information in one place to make sure everyone involved has access.
     3. Information is discussed: The facts are discussed in context of opinions. This can be done in the issue for the report, or
        in a meeting in which case the key discussion points should then be added to the issue.
     4. An action to be taken is arrived at: The action to be taken is decided by consensus as per the standard CPC
        [Decision Making](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/master/CPC-CHARTER.md#section-9-decision-making) process.
     5. Resolution offered: The resolution is offered to the reportee by the contact person. If the resolution is accepted as

>         reasonable or there is no response within 7 days the process moves to the next step. If the reportee expreses concerns then the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        reasonable or there is no response within 7 days the process moves to the next step. If the reportee expresses concerns then the
```

        contact person will bring these back to the CPC members for further discussion. This cycle can continue until the 
        CPC members reach consensus that the reportee's concerns have been adquately addressed.
     6. Final resolution: the resolution agreed by the CPC members is implemented and the outcome reported to the reportee by
        the main contact.
        
## Reports to coc-escalation@openjsf.org

The following members are subscribed to the coc-escalation@openjsf.org mailing list:

* The Foundation Executive Director 
* 1 member from the Board
* 1 member from the CPC
* each top-level project may optionally provide 1 member
* the non top-level projects may optionally provide 1 member
* optionally 1 invited outside expert as agreed by the other CoCP members.

The current list of members is documented in ./CODE_OF_CONDUCT_PANEL_MEMERS.md
     
When a report is received the following actions will be taken:

  * One of the Code of Conduct Panel (CoCP) members will respond to the reportee confirming that the report has been received.
    When possible the same person who responds initially will act as the point of contact for future conversations.

>   * If no respose has been sent within 1 day the Foundation Executive Director will ensure a member of the Code of Conduct

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * If no response has been sent within 1 day the Foundation Executive Director will ensure a member of the Code of Conduct
```

>     Panel is identified as the main point of contact either through email or scheduling an meeting for the CoCP.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Panel is identified as the main point of contact either through email or scheduling a meeting for the CoCP.
```

  * The main point of contact will then ensure the following steps are completed:
     1. Report is acknowledged: The contact person responds to let the reportee know that the report is being discussed.
     2. Information gathering: Time is allocated to collect information in one place to make sure all CoCP members have access.
     3. Information is discussed: The facts are discussed in context of opinions. This can be done in the issue for the report, or
        in a meeting in which case the key discussion points should then be added to the issue.
     4. An action to be taken is arrived at: The action to be taken is decided by consensus as per the standard CPC
        [Decision Making](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/master/CPC-CHARTER.md#section-9-decision-making) process substituting in CoCP for references to the CPC.
     5. The proposed action is discussed with the leadership for the space to which the report applies (ex CPC or member

>         project leadership). If the leadership representatives expreses concerns then the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        project leadership). If the leadership representatives expresses concerns then the
```

        contact person will bring these back to the CoCP members for further discussion.  This cycle can continue  until the 

>         CoPC members reach consensus that the leadership representatives concerns have been adquately addressed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        CoPC members reach consensus that the leadership representatives concerns have been adequately addressed.
```

     6. Resolution offered: The resolution is offered to the reportee by the contact person. If the resolution is accepted as

>         reasonable or there is no response within 7 days the process moves to the next step.  If the reportee expreses concerns then the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        reasonable or there is no response within 7 days the process moves to the next step.  If the reportee expresses concerns then the
```

        contact person will bring these back to the CoCP members for further discussion. This cycle can continue until the 

>         CoPC members reach consensus that the reportee's concerns have been adquately addressed. This may also require that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        CoPC members reach consensus that the reportee's concerns have been adequately addressed. This may also require that
```
